seamos or CMOS logic this is the logic
you see in integrated circuits and
microchips microcontrollers the C stands
for complimentary MOSFET CMOS is a way
to create logic in a microchip that's
where you'll usually see it in a way
that takes more transistors but is even
more power saving than any other method
the idea is for computing devices so
that they don't generate a ton of heat
because the more power you use the more
heat is generated by resistors and all
this other stuff and it also preserves
battery life we would not have handheld
devices without CMOS technology without
MOSFET technology we'd have to have
backpacks with giant batteries in them
to run our phones now you can do C Mo's
with discrete transistors with discrete
MOSFETs you can hold in your hand but
there's not really much reason to
because it doubles the cost of
transistors every single place you'd use
a transistor in a normal logic gate now
you need two MOSFETs so it increases the
costs extraordinarily MOSFETs aren't
that expensive but you try to get a bag
of a thousand it might still be a few
hundred dollars and also they'll take up
so much more space that you're not going
to make a ten thousand transistor device
in a breadboard which means the actual
power consumption is going to be so
miniscule it's not going to be a big
deal CMOS is seen in chips because in
chips you don't have little transistors
and little itty-bitty wires you connect
them with it's layers and you etch and
you put a layer down and you etch and
it's constructed out of the materials
directly rather than separate
transistors so that's why it works you
can pack them in you know fourteen
nanometers are smaller in modern
high-end CPUs but what is CMOS to make
an inverter with an NPN you have power
you have a resistor your output your NPN
and your negative so this is your high
this is your low if you give it high
here then the NPN is open which means
you've got a short to ground here so you
have a low output if you have a low here
the NPN is closed which means this is
not conducting and you have a connection
to high out simple inverter you can do
this with an n-type
AFET exactly the same way give it a lo
the gate will discharge too close and
the whole thing will close there won't
be any conduction and you'll get your
high put your high here and it'll be a
short to ground through it and you get
your live out but just like before let's
actually draw nil there we go so you can
just swap in a MOSFET it'll work fine
but the issue here is when this is high
when the MOSFET is open you're getting
your low output but there is a continual
drain remember how the bjts draw current
when they're on same thing here it's
gonna draw current when it's on not
through the gate the gate will charge
too high and stop and the gate current
will stop - a few electrons sneaking
through but there is a continual drain
through this resistor through the mosfet
to ground in addition to whatever is
going on over here this non-stop drain
that's the problem that's the the power
drain that we want to eliminate even
though this will function it's going to
be too costly on our batteries so what
if we do something else
let's throw away the resistor fun fact
you can actually operate MOSFETs with no
resistors whatsoever other than on the
load I'll get into that in a future
video and generally you do use resistors
by the way in case somebody's about to
call me out I know that there are
resistors on the gates in many
circumstances but you technically don't
need them especially in a breadboard
situation we'll worry about that in the
future for now let's have no resistors
what if I have my positive I have AP
type MOSFET my output an N type MOSFET
and my negative so positive is our high
negative is our low this is an inverter
in CMOS CMOS basically doubles your
transistor cost you need two MOSFETs
everywhere you would use one MOSFET or
BJT in a normal inverter NAND and X or
whatever gate so this is one of many
reasons why you just wouldn't bother to
do this in a discrete situation in
addition to the savings not really being
worth it so let's say our input is high
so let's do high here and high here it's
inverter it's one input going into both
of these well we've got high on the
source and high on the gate so the gate
capacitor quote unquote the gate
capacitance will discharge because
there's no voltage across that and this
MOSFET will turn off which means
is a floating output there's no
conductance but here we've got high I
drew the L in the wrong place you got
the point so we've got high on the gate
here low on the source so this gate will
charge up the n-type will open and there
will be a connection to negative out
here the drain here is closed no
connection but there will be a
connection to low there so we get a low
which is inverted so the output of this
pair is not floating the drain is
floating out of this gate but that
doesn't mean anything so that's our low
now let's say the input is low well low
and low across gate to source here this
drain is closed nothing's going through
there but high to low source to gate
here the strain is open connected to
positive and we get that positive out
here drain is closed here but this drain
is open so again there's no floating on
the actual output going to the next
stage of logic the individual gate has a
floating dream but whether the input is
low or high there is a positive or
affirmative I should say affirmative
connection to high or low no matter
which one so we can safely connect this
two more MOSFETs because there's always
going to be a connection and affirmative
connection to high or low but also in
both cases one of these is open and one
of these is closed the only current
going out would be if there were a load
here and the current would be through
one or the other of these either out the
p-type or in the n-type so source to
drain here or drain to source there but
nothing through there's no constant
drain in order to get this to happen
there's double the parts costs more
space more wiring but lower power so
when you are creating your chip and
you're just itching the little pieces
out this is a great thing that's the
beauty of C Mo's there's no constant
drain the gates take current when they
charge and discharge I suppose only when
they charge to a higher voltage really
because when they discharge they're just
dumping what was already in there so
they use current when they charge to a
higher voltage and they use current if
there's a load out so the next gates
would use current when they charge and
such or if there's you know finally
something being driven it'll be the
normal load current
but nothing idle when they're not
switching when there's no load there's
nothing and so they're super power
efficient and there's your inverter well
what about a NAND gate this is where it
gets tricky so we know it's double so a
NAND gate is two NPN transistors in
series or two PNP transistors in
parallel plus a resistor here we're
going to need because we know we need
double we're going to need four MOSFETs
two peas and two ends and they will be
arranged like so the pea types will be
in parallel the end types will be in
series now regarding the notation you'll
see some places when they denote these
transistors in series you'll have like
your three lines on this one and three
lines on this one let me draw this a
little higher so what you have remember
this is the drain the substrate and the
source and the substrate and source are
tied together in discrete ones well when
you're doing a chip they're not tied
together so you'll actually take the
source of one into the drain of the
other then you've got the drain of the
first one is getting its input and then
you've got the source of the last one
connected to your negative and the
substrates are all grounded as well out
to this negative this is the way you'll
actually see it drawn the way we have it
hooked up with discretes is more like
this so we've got our three and we've
got our input and then we've got our
output but our substrates are tied
together so it's like this so this is
what we actually have you know without
worrying about the body diode so this is
kind of how you'd have it in a chip this
is kind of how you'd have it just
putting in a breadboard and I've tested
this this works fine you connect them
like this and even though the sources
are connected and it's not like this the
sources and the substrates are all
connected this diagram is not the same
as this diagram these are different
wirings but it works I did it in a
breadboard I made it a NAND gate with
two peas and two ends work fine so just
try to not get confused by this just
look at this don't look at all the
little wires try to just say okay
they're in series and hook them up the
same way you'd hook up bjts you have
three pins you have a drain pan a gate
pin a source pin so in series you take a
source pin connected to the next drain
pin that's it don't worry about the
wiring too
watch it'll work just fine although once
again you're probably not going to be
doing this with discrete ones but I just
wanted to show you that's why you see
the wiring and that's why it's weird
because they're drawing it with not
shorted substrates but it'll work just
fine so what happens here this is our
output yes your output so this is a NAND
gate we call them-- and the nand is
going to output high unless all of its
inputs are high because and too highs is
a high so nan to highs is a low so if we
do high high on all of these what
happens recall that the positive is high
the negative is low so a high on the
gate of a p-type will turn it off so
neither of these are conducting so the
positive is disconnected but a high
turns on and end types of both of these
are open so we've got negative this is
open this is open going out whereas both
of these are closed so we have our low
here now if we change either of these to
low right now recall this is two input
I'll do this in two different colors if
you can see them to help this so on the
left here I'm going to say hi and on the
top is high so left P top n is input one
right P below bottom n will be low so
right P bottom n will be low
that'll be input two so what happens now
this is high p-type high is still closed
but this P is getting a low so it's open
so the positive is connected to to the
output and what happens here this n is
on but this n is off because this one's
getting a low so they're in series they
have to both be open for the negative to
connect through so this is closed off
the this is n technically this current
can get all the way through to this
source in between the two but it can't
get to this one so it's still nothing
happening there's no base to emitter
anything going on if you hook them up in
reverse no resistors no none of that
it's still effective it closed off from
negative so you're only getting your
high through the P and you can see
obviously if we switch it will have the
same thing and if they're all low if
input one is also low then both of these
are closed and both of these are open so
positive is coming
both of those so once again we have the
situation where there is no throughput
there's no wasted current through
positive to negative other than what's
going up the load because there's never
a case where both of these are open and
either of these are open
the only time both of these are open is
when both of these are closed so there's
no wasting and there's also no floating
output
there's always an affirmative connection
to positive or negative
no matter the inputs so there's your
NAND gate what about an or well the
beautiful symmetry don't I love symmetry
let's put it in reverse let's take our
two p-type MOSFETs and put them in
series and then the end types these in
parallel so there's the output positive
is high negative is low so let's say
input 1 is the top P oh and the logic so
an or gate we're doing an or gate now
the or operation is low only if both
inputs are low if either or both inputs
are high the output is high so both
inputs low equals low nor both inputs
Loic was high so if we do input 1 is low
so top P left in is input 1 and then
bottom P and right n is input to both of
those are low so what happens low will
turn off both ends low will turn on both
P's so the positive is getting through
the negative is not getting through the
output is high so there's no waste
because both of these are closed and we
have an affirmative connection to high
if we take either of these
let's take input to make it high input
to is high well now we've closed off
this P so even though this P is still
open
this P is closed so the whole thing is
closed because they're in series but
this n is open so no waste through them
and affirmative connection so now the
output is low and if we have both inputs
behind change input 1 too high now both
of these are open so we still have a
connection to negative but both of these
are closed so we still have no
connection to positive no passing
through but in affirmative connection to
low and there's your nor gate and other
MOSFETs see most logic is created in the
same way and there's little techniques
you can do on
paper to decide what arrangement you
need for a particular truth table but
we'll leave that to the people making
CPUs if I ever decide to make discrete
MOSFET logic with seamos style I'll just
create a computer program to figure it
out for me that's what computers are for
or anything but there you go that's the
joy of CMOS that's why it's so power
conserving there's no wasted current the
only current is during the switching and
from the load so the entire you know you
have a whole big chip covered with
MOSFET logic with CMOS logic so every
time you pulse the clock in all of the
things which you'll take a burst of
current and then if you have something
connected to the output pins of your
chip that can be using current but other
than that your chip will sit there and
do almost nothing there will be micro
amps or less of just trickle and that
makes your battery happy so while the
batteries dance in joy and Wonder I'll
be seeing you